---
layout: post
title: "Transcript of Lex Fridman AI Podcast #85 | Roger Penrose: Physics of Consciousness and the Infinite Universe""
date: "2020-04-17 9:09:00"
---

YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=orMtwOz6Db0

The following the conversation with roger penrose physic, physicist, mathematician and philosopher university of oxford.
 He has made fundamental contributions in many disciplines from the mathematical physics of general relativity and cosmology to the limitations of computation view of consciousness in his book, the emperor's new mind roger writes that quo children are not afraid to pose basic questions that may embarrass us as adults to ask in many ways may go with his pot.
 Gas is embraced, the child that is not constrained by how one should behave, speak and think in the adult world.
 Roger is one of the most important minds of our time, so as truly a pleasure and an honour to talk with him.
 This conversation was recorded before the outbreak of the panic panem for every one feeling, the medical, psychological and financial burden of the crisis of sending love your way stay strong or in this together we beat this thing.
 This is the artificial pot cast can enjoy it.
 A new tube review of the five stars in a a pot cast support on or simply connected with me on twitter at le freedman spell f r.
 I d a a m as usual i'll do a few minutes of as now and never has in the middle.
 That can break the flow of the conversation.
 I hope that, worse for you and doesn't hurt the listening experience, quick, some of the ass two sponsors express v, p m and cash up.
 Please consider supporting the pot cast by getting express p at express v b and the calm pod and down went in cash up and using code lu pot cast the show presented by gas up the number one fine in the store when you get it, you cold lu pot cast cash up.
 Unless you send money to friends by big coin and invest, the stock market was as little as one dollar cash does fraction share trading.
 Let me mention that the order execution a that works behind the scenes to create the abstraction of the fractional orders is an a marvel.
 The big props of the gas up engineer for so a hard problem that, in the end, provides an easy face that takes a step up to the next layer of abstraction over the stock market, making trade more access accessible for new investors and diversification, much easier so again, cash from the store we will play and use the coat le pot asked you get ten dollars and cash up will also do dollars the first, an organization that is helping to advance her bodies and stem education for young people around the world.
 The show by express the p, get it and express the come le pod to get a discount and to support the broad cast.
 I've been us using express p m for many years.
 I love it.
 It's easy to use, pressed the big power on button and your privacies protected, and if you like, you can make a look like your location and you else in the world.
 I might be in boston now, but i can make a look like i'm in new york, london, paris or anywhere else.
 This has a large number of obvious benefits.
 Certainly, it allows you to excess international versions of streaming.
 Web sits like the japanese nets or the?
 U k who expressly beyond works on any device.
 You can imagine, i use an shot out to windows and enjoyed, but its available else too, once again get it and express beyond that calm le pod, to get a discount and to support the cast, and now here is my conversation with roger pen pense, you mentioned in conversation with their quiet on the portal pot, cast that two thousand one space favorite movement, which aspect if you could mention of its representation of artificial intelligence and science engineering connected with you.
 There was the scenes there, which are so amazing and how they science for so well done.
 I mean people say you know you in interstellar the this amazing move, which is the most scientific move.
 I thought it's not a patch on two thousand and one i mean two thousand and one that they really went in all sorts of details and they got in getting the free fall well down and everything.
 I thought it was extremely well then suggested the details were may and i don't have things like the scene where, at the beginning they have these and that of human ancestors, which a sort of right sort of a coming.
 Yes, and what's the one where he throws the bone up into the air, and then it becomes this, i mean this and amazing sequence there would he make of the monolith?
 Does it hang a scientific or philosophical meaning to you, this kind of thing, mos, innovation, not really that comes from clark and with all his great fun about that.
 Just the most part, the device yessah.
 They will interfere with the mission that i ought at this view.
 I don't know whether i disagree.
 The question.
 A certain sense was telling it wrong see that the machine seemed to think it was a superior to the human and entitled to get rid of a human human beings and run the show itself.
 What do you think?
 How did the right thing do you think how flo evil or if we think about system systems like hell when we want how to do the same thing?
 In the the future, what was the flaw there, where you are basically christ touching on questions you see, is one supposed to believe that how was actually conscious -DASH and it was played rather that way as though how was a a conscious being because how showed some pain, but some, how appeared to be cognizant of its of what it means to die yes and therefore had an inkling of cautious.
 I am not not sure that aspect of it was made completely clear whether he was really just the very sophisticated computer which really didn't actually have these feelings in somehow, but you're right like the idea of being turned off.
 How does it change things?
 If i was it wasn't conscious?
 Well, it might say that it would be wrong to turn it off if it was actually conscious having these questions arise.
 If you think i mean a a one, the ideas is not a mixture.
 In a sense you say: if it's trying to do everything a human can do and if you take the view that consciousness is something which would come along when the computer is sufficiently complicated, is sufficiently whatever is no use to characterize its consciousness in terms of some computation or criterion so had his consciousness change our valuation of the decision that he made, which i should not try to say that people will be confused about this, because if they say these machines will become conscious, but just simply because it's a degree of computation and when you get beyond that certain degree of computation it will become conscious.
 Then, of course you have all these problems, i you might say well one of the reasons you're doing a because you understand to devise such some distant planet and you don't want to send a a human out there, because then you'd have to bring it back again in that costume, far more since just sending it there and leaving it there.
 But if this device is actually a conscious entity, then you have to face up to the fact that that immoral, and so the mere fact that you are making some a a device a and getting a thinking that removes your responsibility to it would be incorrect, and so this is a sound in that kind of viewpoint.
 I'm not sure how you know, people who take it very seriously.
 I have this curious conversation with with the i'm going to forget names.
 I am am afraid, because the civil happens to me the wrong moment how st douglas still this and he had written this book a got a letter.
 I wish i like that it was a fantastic book, but i didn't agree with his conclusion from girls there.
 I think, got it wrong.
 You see.
 Well, i just tell you my story.
 You because i had never met him and then i knew i was going to meet him the occasion i was coming any one to talk to me as if that's fine and i thought in my man well i'm going to paint him into a corner.
 Is he use his arguments to convince him that certain numbers are conscious in some large enough are actually conscious, and this was going to be my certain.
 So i start having this argument.
 He simply leap into the corner and he didn't even need to be painted into it.
 He took the view that certain numbers were conscious.
 That was a iei.
 I think that's what they think, but be that's, because they can't think of anything else.
 Well, that's right, and so is a reasonable thing and you think we thess your feet at the top and as though it's about the worst organization, you can make right.
 So it can't just be a mistake in nature: there's something going on there and this is made more pronounced when you think of the cere be has when i was the first thinking about these things, i was told that it had half as many new or something like that come and now they tell me got far more news than the city and three room, mister, so convoluted thing at the top people of his thought.
 Well, arabella is this thing.
 She looks a bit like a ball of wool.
 That is a bad it'sh.
 Shell is not so easy.
 I am trying to say, but whatever consciousness is, is not a computation.
 Yes, it's not a physical process which can be described by computation, but he nevertheless could be to want one of the interesting things model models that you've proposed as the orchestra objective reduction.
 He was that going from there i say so i say i've no idea, so i wrote this book through my scientific career.
 I thought you know when i retired i'll have enough time to write a a sort of popular book, which i will explain my ideas and puzzles what i like beautiful things about physics and mathematics and this puzzle about compatibility and consciousness and so on and in the process of writing this book.
 Well, i thought thought i do it when i retired, i didn't say i wouldn't wait that long, because there was a radio discussion between edward fred and ma min and they were talking about what computers could do and they were entering entering a big room.
 He imagined entering his big room at the other end of the room, too.
 Computers were talking to each other and, as you walk up to the computers they will have communicated to each other more ideas, concepts things than the entire human race had ever done thought i know you are coming from, but i just don't believe you there's something missing.
 That's it's not so i thought well.
 I should write my book, and so i did it was that, but roughly the same time, stephen hawking, this writing his brief history of time and had at some point the book.
 You talk about the emperor, emperor's name this and both are an incredible books of the brief history of time in new mind.
 Yes, i am quite interesting because he got he told me.
 He had got some and, i think think, to rise up forward.
 He could get the see i go.
 I want my going to do.
 I can can have nothing to get anywhere unless i get somebody, so i know master gardener, sir, i don't think do it so he did and it is a a very nice for so that.
 So that's an incredible book and some of the this's not my prospect, so i thought i had to say it and, as i was writing my book, he said it well.
 I don't really know anything about the physiology.
 What i my doing writing this book.
 So i sat reading up about your physiology and i read on that not try to find out how it is the nerve signals could possibly preserve.
 Quite coherence -DASH and all i read is that the second and electrical signals which go along the nerves creates a effects through the brain and there's no chance.
 You can cast it so that this is hopeless.
 So i come to the the end of the book and i am more or less give up and just think of something which i didn't believe in this may be.
 This is a way round it.
 But now and then you say that well may this book at least stimulate young people who do or something -DASH and i got all these letters from old retired people instead is the only people who could have time to read my book.
 Let me step for you at a except stuart.
 You have a right to me and he said i think you are missing something you don't know about.
 My doing isn't pretty quite like that, but that was more or less and he said this is what you really need to consider.
 I thought my god.
 Yes, that's a much more promising structure said i mean the fundamental fundamentally, you were searching for the source of non compatible source of consciousness within the human brain in the biology, and so what are?
 If i may ask what m or two, when you see, i was ignorant in what i dread.
 I never came across them in and in the books i looked at.
 Perhaps i only read rather superficially, which is true, but i didn't know about my steward.
 I think one of things was impressed him about them, as when you see pictures of my toes, that's a cell dividing and you see all the cromer so and the get there get all line under theys, and so he started again and interested in them and he formed a view.
 While he was at his day, job not job before call is to put people sleep, except he doesn't like calling asleep, because it's different general aesthetic in a reversible way that you want to make sure that they don't experience the pain that what otherwise be something that they feel and consciousness is turned off for a while, and it can be turned back on again as crucial that you can turn it off and turn it on.
 And what do you do when you're doing that?
 What did general a aesthetic gases to do and see?
 He formed the view that it's the m they affect and the details of why he formed that view is not or the glare clear to me, but there, but as an interesting story he keeps talking about.
 But i've found this very exciting, because i thought these structures is little tube tubes which inhabit pretty well.
 Ourselves is not just now, apart from red, bloods red themselves, they inhabit pretty well all the other cell in the body, but they are not not all the same kind.
 You get different kinds of my cress and the ones that excited me.
 The most that this may still not be to clear, but the one is excited me most -DASH were the ones that the only ones that i knew about at the time, because they were their very, very symmetrical structures, and i had reason to believe that these very symmetrical structures would be much better at preserving a quo state quo coherence, preserving the thing without you just need, because it preserve certain degrees of freedom without them leaking into the the environment whence they look into the environment, a loss.
 So you are to preserve these quondam states at a level which the state reduction process comes in and that's where i think the non compatibility comes in and it's the measurement process.
 Ch mechanics was going on to something about the the measure of present was going on something about the structure of the ms here intuitions as made me there's something here may be, this kind of structure allows for the the mystery of the there is a chance.
 Yes, it just struck me that partly it was the symmetry, because there is a feature of s symmetry.
 You can produce perfect, preserve qua coherence, much better with symmetrical structures, as there is a good reason for that, and that impressed me up.
 I didn't know the difference between the and b at that time, which could be important.
 Now that could that's the sea which isn't talked about much, but that some in some sense details we get take a step back just to say these people are not familiar that this this this was a called the orchestra's object, objective, reduction, idea or or o r, which is a biological philosophy of mind that postulate the consciousness origin originates at the qua level at so that has to do with your search for where, where is it coming from?
 So that counter to the notion that cautious my arise from the computation performed by the synopsis?
 Yes, at the key point, he sometimes people say it's, because it's quite a mechanical, it's not just that.
 She is more outrageous than that.
 You see.
 This is one reason i think we are so far off from it, because we don't even know the physics right you see it's not just to mechanics.
 There was a systems and biological structures now will starting to see that some basic biological systems does depend on a work you their first place.
 All of chemistry is gone.
 Mechanics people got used to that, so they don't count that they said.
 Let's not count.
 One chemistry we saw got the hang of that.
 I think, but you have quite facts which are not just chemical in synthesis, and this is one of the striking things in the last several years that synthesis in three a basically process which not simply quite chemical, it's using of mechanics in a very basic way.
 So you can start saying, oh well, with synthesis by some one case.
 Why not, sir, if you of your own and things like that -DASH maybe there's something which is like for synthesis in that respect.
 But what i am saying is even more outrageous than that, because those things are talking about conventional co.
 Mechanic mechanics now.
 My argument says that conventional mechanic mechanics if you're just following the short of question that still compatible till you've got to go beyond that.
 So you've got to go to where quite a mechanics goes wrong.
 In a certain sense, yet a little bit careful about that, because the way people do call him mechanics is a sort of a mixture of two different process processes.
 One of them is the shroud her, which is a shroud i wrote down, and it tells you how the sister state of assistant evolves in it all.
 According to this equation, completely determine the, but it involves into ridiculous situations, and this was what writing and was very much pointing out with his cat, that you follow my equation, that she was a question and you could say that you have to cut the cat, which is dead and alive at the same time.
 That would be the evolution of the throat equation would lead to a state which is the quick cat being dead and alive at the the same time, and he more or less saying this is an absurdity.
 People i say was surely a said: you can have a cat which that not that you see he was saying this is an absurdity.
 There is something missing and that the reduction of the state or the collapse of the way function whatever it is.
 Is something which is has to be understood is not following the road: it's not the way we conventionally do call the mechanics there's something more than that.
 Alice is easy to quote authority here, because i stand at least three of the greatest physicists of twenty century who were very fundamental and develop in quality mechanic mechanics.
 I stand one of them shrouding her her another de.
 You have to look carefully at writing.
 He didn't tempt us say this out loud.
 I much as he was very cautious about what he said.
 You find the right place and you see he says one of mechanics is a provisional theory.
 We need something which explain, explains the collapse of a function.
 We need to go beyond the theory we have now.
 I happen to be one of the kinds of people there.
 Many there is a hope group of people they all considered to be a bit in a, but never to believe that mechanics needs to be be modified.
 There is a small minority of those people which were really a minority who think that the way in which it modified has to to be with gravity, and there is an even smaller minority of those people who think it's particular way that i think it is you see so for those of the corner of gravity folks, but what's what the call gravity is already not this, because when you say quo of gravity, what you really mean is quite a mechanics applied to gravitational theory.
 So, let's take this wonderful formalism of corn mechanic mechanics and make gravity fit into it, so that is what of gravity is meant to be.
 Now i am am saying, you've got it be more even handed that gravity affects the structure of mechanics too is not just to gravity.
 You've got to graize qua of mechanics, and it's it's a true way thing was then, when you even get started so that you are saying, and we have to figure out a totally new ideas.
 No, it's your stock.
 Have a theory, that's the trouble.
 The whether this is a big problem is, what's the i don't know, though it may be in the very early days that it is in the very early days, and but i just making this point.
 Yes.
 Is she still at a chance to be a penrose says that it's that it's got to be the reduction of the state, and so let's use it?
 The trouble is penrose, doesn't say that pen says well.
 I think that we have no experiments as yet, which showed that if there are experiments which are being thought through and which i am hoping will be performed, there is a an experiment which is being developed by the by who is, i have known for a long time who share his time between lad and the nether land and santa barbara and the?
 U s and he's been working on an experiment which could perhaps demonstrate that mechanics as we now understand it.
 If you don't bring in the gravitational facts, m has to be modified and is also experiment, experiments that are under way the kind of them look at the side of things to see there is in the biology.
 You can see something like that.
 You briefly mention that sir really should have one of the only experimental attempt attempts in the very early days of even the about.
 I think, there's there's a very serious area here, which is what stuart he is doing, and i think it's very important one of the few places that you can really get a bit of a handle on what consciousness is, is what turns it off and when you are thinking about general aesthetics, it's very specific.
 These things turn consciousness off.
 What the hell do.
 They do well do and a number of people who work with him and others.
 I happen to believe that the general aesthetics directly affect my mys, and there is some evidence for this.
 I don't know how strong it is and how water tight the case is, but i think there is some evidence pointing in that kind of direction.
 It's not just an ordinary chemical process of something quite different about it, and one of the main candidate is that these aesthetic gases do affect directly my and how strong that evidence is.
 I would be in a position to say, but i think there is fairly impressive evidence in the point is that experiments are being undertaken with just, and that is sure his sister is very clear direction where you can think of experiments which could indicate where whether or not it's really my materials, which the aesthetic gases directly affect naturally exciting are one of the sad things is as far as i am for my outside prospect is not many people are working on this, so there is a very feels like there is very few people carrying the flag forward on this.
 I think it's, it's not many in the sense of minority, but it's not any more.
 You see when i were.
 I originally was there.
 You know we were just just us and a few few of our friends.
 They were many people to exhibit it.
 It's grown into.
 One of the main view points, yet there might be about four or five or six different views bit.
 People hold and is one of em, so that is considered as one of the possible lines of thinking.
 Yes, you describe physic theories as falling into one of three categories: the superb the useful of the tentative, like those words of the beautiful cat.
 Do you think we will ever have a superb theory of intelligence and of consciousness?
 We might and were a long way from it.
 I don't think we were were even with whether in the tentative scale i mean it's a you, don't think even entered the realm of tentative, probably not that he had had that you.
 What you see the controversial we don't have a clear view which it is accepted by a you set your people.
 Most views are computation in one form or another.
 They think it some, but it's not very clear because even the the i i t, people who think of of them computation, but i've heard them say they no consciousness supposed to be be not so work is not common.
 What hell is it?
 What go?
 What's going on what physical processes are are going on, which are that?
 What what is it to me for something to be computation of then so is a well.
 There has to be a process which is, it is very curious.
 The way the history has developed, ch mechanics because very early on the people thought there was something to lose consciousness, but it was almost the other way round.
 You see, you have to say that the shroud our creation says all these different alternative have all at once, and then when is it that only one of them happens where one of the views which is quite common, commonly held by a few distinguished visitors, this were a conscious being looks at the system.
 What becomes aware of it, and at that point it becomes one of the other.
 That's a row where consciousness is somehow actively reducing the state.
 My view is almost the exact opposite of that it is.
 The state reduces itself in some way, which some non computation or way, which we don't understand.
 We don't have a proper theory of, and that is a building block of what consciousness is the consciousness is the other way around.
 It depends on that choice, which nature makes all the time when the state becomes one of the others, rather than the superstition of one and the other, and when that happens, there is well.
 We are saying now, an element of pro proto consciousness takes place.
 Pro consciousness is roughly speaking, the building block out of which at your consciousness is constructed.
 So you have these pro proto elements which are when the state decide.
 It won't do one thing or the other and that's the thing which, when organized together, that's the o, our part in or but the part, that's the the part.
 At least one can see where we're driving it as a theory, quinton choice of going this way that way, but the path which is the orchestra orchestration of this is much more mysterious and how does their brain somehow walk straight?
 All these individual?
 Oh our processes into a generous, genuine, genuine conscious experience, and it may be something that beautifully simple, but were completely in the dark about.
 Yes, i think at the moment that it's that's the thing you know how to put the word walk down there to say that more and clear what that really means, just like the word material or i, but we know, is, and we've been dancing a little bit between the word intelligence or understanding and consciousness.
 Do you see those as sitting in the same space of mystery as we as i turned to say you have understanding and intelligence and awareness and somehow understanding is in the middle of it.
 He says i like to say: could you say a tea that is actually intelligent if it doesn't have the quality of understanding makes us terms, i don't know to define, but who cares and there really there is somewhat poetic or, as i somehow understand them.
 Yes, i would i not mathematical nature, as you see as a mathematician, i don't know how to find any of them.
 At least i can point to the connections that the idea is.
 Intelligence is something which i believe needs understanding, otherwise you wouldn't say for any intelligence and understanding needs a awareness.
 Otherwise you wouldn't really say is understanding.
 Do you say of an entity that he understands something and is really aware of it in our normal usage?
 So there is a three of understanding and intelligence and i just intend to concentrate on understanding, because that's where i can say something and as the girdle fear on things like that, but i wonder i, what does it mean to be the colour, blue or something from an angry, much more difficult question, and is it the same?
 If i see a colored blue -DASH and you see it, if you are, are somebody with him?
 This is this condition will call them.
 Oh, you sign a sound to a i a colour and sounds mixed up and that sort of thing a an interesting subject i here, but from the physics perspective from the fundamental perspective, we don't, i think we way often having much understanding what's going on there in your two thousand ten books cycles of time.
 You suggest that another universe may have existed before the big bank.
 You describe.
 This idea foresaw what is the big bank sa a funny word and what i may have been there before it?
 Yes, just as a matter of terminology, i don't like to call it in another universe, because when you have another universe, you think of it can quite separate from us, but these things they are are not separate.
 Now the big bang conventional theories, the brought up in the sense of what i saw you again just in cosmo, there was of the steady state model, which was so philosophical philosophically very interesting, and there wasn't a big bang in that theory.
 But somehow new material was created all the time in the form of hydrogen and the universe kept on expand, expanding and expanding expanding, and there was room for more.
 It was a rather philosophically nice picture.
 It was disproved when the big bang, but when i i say, a big bang, this was theoretically discovered by people trying to solve arr and applied it to to cosmology.
 I i didn't like the idea he liked to know a universe which was there all the time time and he had a model which they was there all the time.
 But then there was this discovery.
 Accidental discovery, very important discovery of this micro wave background, and if you there's the crackle on your television screen, which is already sensing this my background, which is coming at us from all directions, and you can trace it back and back and back and back then it came from a very early stage of the universe.
 Well, it's part of of the big bank theory.
 The big man theory was when people tried to solve, they really found you had to have this initial state and the universe it was used to be called the primordial atom, and things like this, this freed man and a mare was a russian with a belgian and they independently were basically free.
 First and the mare talked about the initial state, which is a very concentrated and little state which seem to be the origin of the universe, from atom as the primordial atom is what he called it the term, and then it became hoyle used to turn a big bag in a kind of derogatory sense.
 It would be the case.
 Yes, it's like sort of got picked up on it, where it wasn't his intention originally, but he then the evidence piled up and piled up and made one of my friends, and i learned it up from him when i came just then so he used but the steady state, and then he got to converted to him.
 I'm sorry, i had a great respect from you and our leur said i was wrong.
 This steady state does work.
 There was a big bank and this m back that you see it's not actually quite the big bang when i said not quite it's about three hundred and eighty thousand years after the big bank, but that's what you see, but then you have to have had this big bag before, as in order to make the equation work and it works beautifully, except for one little thing, which is this thing called inflation which people had to put into it to make it work.
 When i first heard of it, i didn't like it at all: was inflation?
 Inflation is that in the first i had been to give you a very tiny number think of a second that's, not very long now i am am going to give you a fraction of a a second one over a number.
 This number has thirty two digits between well between thirty six and thirty, two digits tiny, tiny time between those two tiny ridiculous seconds fraction of a second.
 The universe was supposed to have expanded in this way and enormous way for no apparent reason had to invent a particular think of the infant on field to make it do it, and i thought this is completely crazy.
 There are reasons why people stuck with this idea.
 You see.
 The thing is that i formed my model for reasons which are very fundamental if you like it has to do this very fundamental principle, which is known as the second law of the dynamics, the second of the says more or less things get more and more round.
 This time goes on now way say exactly the same thing.
 If things get less and less random as things go back as you go back in time, they get less and less for them they go back and back and back and back and the earliest thing you can direct see.
 Is this m went back?
 What's one of the most striking features of it?
 Is that this random?
 It has the what you call this spectrum of which is that what called the plank spectrum of frequency different intensity for different sequences, and is this wonderful curve due the next plank and what's to tell you, is telling you that the piece is a maximum start is often a maximum and it's going up ever since i call back a mammoth in the room.
 I a paradox.
 It is that the people are quite cos worry about this, so i worried about it and then i thought.
 Well, it's not really a paradox, because you are looking at the matter and radiation at a maximum state.
 What you not seeing directly in that is the gravitation, its gravitation, which is not formalized the gravitation which vary low and its low by the uniformity, and you see that in the too, is very uniform over the whole sky and compressing a long story into a very short, fierce set and doing a great job.
 So what i'm saying is that there's our huge puzzle why it was gravity in this very low state, very highly organized state.
 Everything else was all round and that to me there's the biggest problem in cosmology the biggest problem.
 Nobody, he worry about it.
 He must say they sold all the problems and they don't worry about the inflation and saucers it doesn't it can't, because it's just just that that was your problem with the inflation in describing some aspect of yes, let well right after the big bag and flesh and is supposed to stretch it out and make it on uniform, miss it doesn't do it because it can only do its uniform already at the beginning.
 It is you just had a look out.
 I can't go to the the details, but it doesn't solve it and it was completely clear that it doesn't so by a word is the form of sickly cosmology of there?
 Was it hard to talk about something before?
 Yes that singular?
 I began.
 I was just thinking of myself how boring this universe is going to be.
 You wrote this expansion.
 This was discovered early in the in my dear twenty first century, people discovered that these exploding stars showed that the universe is actually undergoing this expansion.
 So it's a self similar expansion and it seems to be a feature of this term that ar introduced into his cosmology for the wrong reason.
 He wanted a universe that was static.
 He put this new term into his cosmology and to make it make sense, called the cosmological and then when he got convinced that the the universe had a big bang.
 He retracted it complaining that this was his greatest blunder.
 The trouble as it wasn't a blunder was actually right, very ironic, and so did the universe seems to be hev with this cosmological.
 So this universe is expanding.
 Expanding, what's going going to happen in the future?
 Well, he gets more and more boring for well was the most interesting thing in the universe where his black holes, the black, hold more or less gulped down the entire cluster clusters of galaxies.
 Her class it'll swallow up most of our galaxy that we were running into andromeda galaxy black hole that black hole swallow our well they'll, get bigger and bigger and they'll be swallow up the whole cluster of galaxies.
 Do it all down pretty well all most of it may be not all most of it.
 I can then that'll happen to they'll, be just these black holes or pretty boring, but still that as boys, the it's going to get more boring, because these black houses wait wait anywhere at any rate and wait and unbelievable length of time and hawkins black hole of evaporation start to come in and the black house you just as kind tedious, finally evaporate away.
 Each one goes away disappears with a pop, then what can be more bore at that?
 It was boring then.
 Now this is really boring.
 There's nothing !EXCLAMATIONMARK not even black holes gets cold, colder and colder and cold and cold, and never this is very, very boring.
 That is not science.
 Is it, but it's its emotional who's going to be bored by this universe, not us, we won't be around.
 It would be mostly times running around and what the do they don't get bored, because it's a part of relative you say is not really that they don't experience anything.
 That's not the point.
 The get right out to infinity without experience any time.
 It's the way for the way, works and there's just part of what i used to do in my old days when i was looking gravitational radiation and how things behaved infinity in he is just like another place.
 You can squash it down as long as you don't have any mass in the world.
 Infinite is just another place.
 The get there the grave to get there.
 What do they get they run to infinity, they say will now i'm here.
 What way?
 There's something on the other side.
 Is there the usual view is just a mathematical notion.
 There's nothing on the other side, that's just the boundary of it.
 A nice example is this beautiful serious of pictures by the dutch usher.
 You may know them the one called circle in they are very famous one with the angels and the devils, and you can see them crowding and crowding and crowding up to the edge now the kind of geometry that these angels and devils and inhabit that their infinity, but from our perspective in infinite, is just a cart, is a place o cave as well as i used to take a three hours and the just the word you saying infinity just the place, so i have fought for the most part infinity of gone back and is a mathematical concept.
 I think this is one thing there is: is an actual physical manifestly in which way does infinity ever manifest, manifests itself in our physical universe, what it does in various places.
 You see it's a thing that would, if you're, not a mathematician, if the old can't think about that, that is a thing about affinity all the time they get used to the idea, and they just play around with different kinds of infinities, and it becomes no problem.
 But you are, you just have to take my word for it that one of the things is you see you are taking you to geometry.
 Well, just keep some deep and keeps on going, and it goes out to infinity now, there's other kinds of geometry -DASH and this is the: what cool had geometry is a bit like you?
 The ges was different.
 It's like what a you was trying to describe in his angels and devils, and he learned about this from co, and he think they are very nice thing.
 I shall represent this infinity to this kind of geometry.
 There is not quite euclidian drama, which is a bit bit like it, that the angels and the devil devils inhabit and their infinity by this nice transformation.
 You squashed the their infinity down, so you can draw it as this nice circle boundary to the universe.
 Now, from our outside perspective, we see their infinity as the boundary.
 Now.
 What i'm saying is that it's very like that, the infinity that we might experience like those angels devils in their world can be thought of.
 As a boundary, though, i found this a very useful way of talking about radiation, gravitational radiation and things like that.
 It was a trick mathematical trick so know.
 What i am saying is that that mathematical trick becomes real, that somehow the phone they need to go somewhere because for there from their perspective, infinity is just another place now.
 This is a difficult idea to get your mind round.
 So that's why i, my cousin one of the reason cosmo is the finding a lot of trouble and taking me seriously, but to me it's not such a wild idea.
 What's on the other side of that infinity, you have to think.
 Why am i allowed to think of this because ph don't have any mass and we in physics, have beautiful ways of measuring time.
 Their are incredibly precise, clock, clocks, atomic and nuclear clocks unbelievably precise, why they so precise because of the two most famous equations of twentieth century physics, one of them is iron e m c was the tell us.
 Energy and mass are equivalent.
 The other one is even older than that still twentieth century.
 Only just max plank e e h, new new is a f frequency.
 Each is a constant again like the e is energy.
 Energy and frequency are equivalent, but the two together energy and master criminal and and his infrequent equivalent black, but there together, mass and frequency are equivalent absolutely basic physical principle.
 If you have a massive entity, a massive particle, it is a clock with the very precise frequency is not you can't directly use it your scale, it done so your atom and new clerks, but that's the best principle.
 You scale it down to send you perceive, but it's the same principle.
 If you have mass, you have beautiful clocks, but the other side of that coin is: if you don't have mass, you don't have clocks.
 If you don't have clocks, you don't have rulers, you don't have scale space and time.
 You don't have a measure of the scale of space.
 Still you have have.
 If you do have the structure that was called the structure, who sees what the angel's devils have.
 If you look at the eye of the devil, no matter how close to the bound boundary it is, it has the same shape, but it has a different size, so you can scale up and you can scale down, but you mustn't change the shape.
 So it's supposedly the same idea but applied to space time now in the very remote future you have things which don't measure the scale, but the shape, if you like, is still there now that's in remote future.
 Now i can do the exact opposite now.
 I can go away back into the big bank.
 Now, if you get there, things go hustle and hot, dense, denser and denser what the universe dominated by particle particles moving around almost with a speed of light.
 When they get almost at a speed of light o k, they began to lose the mass too.
 They completely opposite reason.
 They lose the sense of scale as well.
 So my crazy idea is the big bang and a remote future.
 They seem completely different.
 One is extremely dense, extremely hot, the others very, very rarey and very very cold.
 But if you squash one down by this form scale you get the other, so they look and feel very different, they're, really almost the same, the remote future on the other side and claiming as that one of the ph go they go into the next big bay.
 You going to get your mind round that crazy idea, taking a step on the other side of the place that is infinity.
 Oh yes, but i'm saying the other side of our big bank.
 Now i got back into the big man that was the remote future of a previous a previous on, and what i'm saying is that there are signals coming through to us which we can see and which we do see, and these are both signals.
 The two main signals are to do with black holes.
 One of them is the collisions between black holes and as they spiral into each other.
 They release a lot of energy in the form of of gravitational waves.
 Those gravitational ways get through in a certain form into the the next that that's fascinating.
 That there is some i mean of me may be inquired far wrong, but that means that some information can travel yes from another, a exactly that that is a a fast i mean were described to the discussion of a the family paradox.
 You know that if there is intelligent life, yes i'm be in your communication.
 Me immediately takes you there, so we have a paper.
 I might have my my i goes down when i worked with us on this idea for a while.
 We have a crazy paper on that earth.
 So looking at the the family paradoxes for so so that if the universe is are just over and over and over punctuated by the punctuated, the singular singularity of the big bank and then intelligent or ain't, any kind of system can communicate through from the that i haven't, we heard anything from our alien friends cause.
 We don't know how to look.
 That's found the matter.
 The reason is we.
 I don't know you see it's a speculation.
 I mean that the city programme was a reasonable thing to do, but still speculation is trying to say.
 O k may be not too far away with a civilization which got there first before us early enough that they could send our signal signals, but how far away would you need to go before i mean?
 I don't know we with so little knowledge about that.
 We haven't seen any signals yet, but it's worth looking it's worth looking when i'm trying to say here's another possible place where he might look now.
 You are not looking at civilization, which got there first.
 You are looking at those civilizations which were so successful, probably not more successful.
 The will likely to be by looks of things i which knew how to handle their own gravel warming or whatever it is and said get through it all and to live to a ripe old age in the sense of a civilization, to the extent that they could harness signals that they could propagate through for some reason of their own desires, whatever we would know to two other civilizations which might be able to pick up the signal signals, but what kind of signals would there be?
 I have a fog.
 Let me ask the question: yes, what you use the most beautiful idea in physics or mathematics or the art at the intersection of the two i'm going have to say complex analysis.
 I might have said infinities and one of the most single most beautiful idea, i think, was the fact that you can have infinities of different sizes and so on, but that's in a way, i think, complex analysis.
 This it's got so much magic in it.
 It's a very simple idea: you take these because of you be take you take the the you fill them up into the fractions and the real numbers.
 You imagine you're, trying trying to measure a continuous line, and then you think of how you can solve equations and what about square was minus one.
 Well, there's no real number, which has to satisfies that.
 So you have to think of well there's a number called.
 I you think you invent it well in a certain sense.
 It's there already, but this number, when you add that square of man is one to it.
 You have what's called the complex numbers and they are an incredible system.
 If you like, you put one little thing in you put square a man as one in and you get how much benefit out of it all sorts of things that you never imagined before, and it's that amazing all hiding there and putting that square of mine in so i that'll thing i've seen in mathematics or physics and its mechanics and inquired is there already, you might think.
 What's she doing there or it just a nice bit piece of matter and then suddenly we see no, it's the very crucial basis of mechanics saw on the air in the way the world works on the question of whether matthew is discovered or invented, it sounds like you may be suggest, suggesting that partially is possible.
 That indeed discovered how absolutely yes, now it's more like archaeology than you might think.
 So let me ask the most ridiculous.
 I may be the most important question: what is the meaning of life?
 Forgive your love purpose happiness in me.
 What do you think we're here on this?
 Given all the big bang and the infinities of fat, that we told i would say, i think it's not a stupid question.
 I mean there are some people, you know many of my colleagues and scientists and they that a stupid question meaning and when we just here, because things came together and produce life and so on.
 I think there is more to it, but what there is that's more to it really much idea and it might might be somehow connected with the mechanisms of consciousness, though you are in talking about the mystery there.
 He is connected with all sorts of.
 I think these things are tied up in ways which are you see.
 I don't think the mystery of consciousness is tied up with the mystery of qua mechanics and the how fits in with a classical world and that's all to do with the mystery of quantity of complex numbers, and there are mysteries.
 There are look like my mistress, but i they seem to have a bearing on the way the physical world operates.
 We're scratching the surface moving a long, huge way to go before.
 We really understand that, and is the beautiful idea that the depth, the mathematical depth could be discovered, and then this tragedies of and complete completeness along the way they will have to some our ways around ye so as as a huge had taught you think it so so much time to day.
 It's been my pleasure.
 Thank you thanks for listening to this conversation with roger penrose and thank you to presenting sponsor cash up.
 Please consider supporting this pot gas by getting express p m and express the p s pod and down in cash up and using cold legs pot cast.
 He drew his guests when you two review it with five stars and a pot gas support on or simply connected with me on twitter, at le freedman and now let me who was a wisdom that roger penrose wrote in his book.
 The emperor's new mind beneath all.
 This technicality is the feeling that it is indeed co obvious that the conscious mind cannot work like a computer, even though much of what is involved in mental activity might do so.
 This is the kind of obviousness that a child can see, though the child may later in life, become browbeaten into believing that the obvious problem problems are non problem problems to be argued into non existence by careful reasoning and clever choices.
 Of definition, children sometimes see things clearly that are obscured in later life.
 We often forget the wonder that we felt as children when the cares of the co real world had begun to settle on our shoulders.
 Children are not afraid to post ba questions that may embarrass us as adults to ask what happens to each of our streams of consciousness after we die.
 Where was it before we were born?
 Might we become, or have been some one else?
 Why do we perceive at all?
 Why are?
 Are we here?
 Why is there universe here at all in which we can actually be?
 These are puzzle, puzzles that tend to come with the awakening awakenings of awareness in any of us, and no doubt with the awakening of self within which every creature or other deed first came.
 Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
